what would camela Harris presidency mean
to the global Community would she
continue the transatlantic commitment of
her current boss President Joe Biden
what about Ukraine what about Israel
what about China what about NATO there's
hardly a better person to address these
questions than Ian bremmer he's an
American political scientist focused on
global political risk Ian welcome to DW
sure great to see you let's start with
Israel Ian uh the support of the
Netanyahu government is a huge problem
for the Democrats in the United States
as many potential voters in important
swing stage such as for example Michigan
uh one the more critical approach where
do you see CA Harris going there um it's
very hard for her to differentiate
herself while Biden is President because
she has to be supportive of his policy
and her statements while they've had
different emphasis
have certainly been completely
supportive of his policy uh I think a
president Harris would actually be quite
different I think you would see a lot
more pressure uh on Israel to um limit
the campaign uh or else uh I I I don't
think that'd be the blank check that you
have seen you know uh in in reality if
if not in in principle uh from the Biden
Harris Administration over the past nine
months she is much more concerned uh
about uh the uh Palestinian ability to
continue to live um with basic human
conditions on the ground in Gaza um and
frankly in the West Bank she sees uh US
foreign policy on Israel Palestine as a
failed policy um and that's again that's
a I can't see her saying that publicly
uh but I think that you would would see
her govern that way uh and and in that
regard of course she's much more
sympathetic to Palestinian statehood um
and especially on the back of the
knesset voting against two-state
solution so I think she might consider
uh being willing to recognize a
Palestinian State even before uh Israel
would accept it you know that some
European countries have already done
that others are considering it I think
you would find that a Harris
Administration would be much more
aligned with the Europeans
on Israel Palestine uh than either Biden
or Trump I think that would in fact in
some ways it's the most meaningful
differentiation between Harris uh and
Biden but as you just said I will be
very hard for her to talk about that
during the next 10 weeks or so but it
could be a maker or breaker in the
election could it I don't know about
that I mean you know Americans do not
consider any major foreign policy ISS
right now to be the top of their agenda
um immigration uh inflation um and
abortion are are all significantly more
important than any foreign policy issues
that you would ask me about today
migration of course is in part a foreign
policy issue but for most Americans it's
a domestic issue which is why it's so
important um I do think that in terms of
you know a swing state like Michigan
where you have a lot of American
citizens voters uh with a background
Heritage um from the Middle East and a
lot of Muslims uh that live there uh
that is a place where kamla Harris could
outperform from Biden but it will be
hard for her to say the sorts of things
that would really allow that uh needle
to move well and then there's of course
uh Ukraine um when I'm traveling the US
I hear from more and more Americans who
say that the US should uh uh cut
spending for other countries and do more
for its own people what do you think
where will Camila Harris stand in this
regard I I think that that fear is is
overstated um uh you know by the way the
$61 billion in Military Support that the
US Congress overwhelmingly and
bipartisan approved a few months ago
would not have happened if Trump didn't
support it uh Trump was more than happy
to see it drag out but ultimately he was
was happy to have it done and his view
is that the Europeans should be spending
more um on defense for Ukraine and on
their own Collective defense but that a
Ukrainian self-defense is also in
American interest he's made that very
clear so I I don't think that we are
facing in a trump Administration or a
Harris Administration suddenly literally
jettisoning uh support for Ukraine I
don't believe that but I I do understand
that the ukrainians are under pressure
and they're under pressure in part
because American Support is not quite
what it should be in part because
European support is also uncertain going
forward you probably know that the
Germans under fiscal constraints have
just reduced by 50% their own
commitments to Ukraine over 2025 we
can't talk about the US and Ukraine
unless we also bring up Germany and of
course the fact that the ukrainians are
themselves running out of people I hate
to say this but I do fear that um
because the ukrainians have done such
extraordinary things to defend their
land over the last 2 and a half years
that we in the west the Germans the
Americans and others we have made the
ukrainians out to be
superhuman and and it's not right you
know they're people uh with with
passions and with frailties and and with
weaknesses and and they are you know
they are facing limits of what they can
do uh and and you know it is absolutely
possible that the ukrainians will end up
losing a lot more uh because they just
can't continue to perform at this level
and I say that about Ukraine's president
too that brings me to my next question
Ian so we experienced during the recent
prisoner swap that the US and its allies
are willing to negotiate with Vladimir
Putin what would that mean for a Harris
Administration when it comes to Ukraine
also regarding what what you just talked
about well the ukrainians don't like the
fact that there were secret negotiations
involving your country my country Poland
other NATO allies for many months with
Russia that the ukrainians literally had
no idea was going on so the Ukrainian
perspective will be well wait a second
so if they could do that have they been
talking about like the war and and not
telling us I mean you can understand why
they'd be worried about that um and you
know I I know that those negotiations
have been
overwhelmingly um about getting this
prisoner exchange and that there's no
meaningful movement on negotiations that
would involve Russia and Ukraine but I
mean you know are we certain that this
has never come up in a way that might
potentially affect Ukrainian sovereignty
no one can tell you that no one can tell
you that so I I think they right to be
worried but I also believe that the
Ukrainian population themselves are
moving to a position where some type of
negotiation is becoming more feasible um
and where they understand that they
can't just continue to fight and fight
and fight even if that means you know
losing some of their territory I I do
believe that the reality of Ukraine is
that they will be partitioned I believe
that they will end up losing a
significant amount of territory and what
I mean by that is that there will be a
sign ific amount of territory that
Russia will continue to occupy for the
foreseeable future and and I think that
the west and Ukraine are increasingly
coming to that reality and I think that
that by the way that is true for Harris
and for Trump the difference and this is
important very important for the
Europeans is that Trump is much more
willing to engage with the Russians
unilateral he would be willing to cut a
deal on the prisoners or to cut a deal
on Ukraine without talking to the
Europeans the NATO allies and without
talking to Ukraine and Kamala Harris
would not be willing to do that she like
Biden would want to ensure that this was
a consensus policy of the NATO alliance
together with the ukrainians who have
agency Trump's a lot more like Kissinger
you know Trump you had a conversation
with Kissinger back when he was alive
and he would talk about these great
Powers as if other countries didn't even
exist it's like well here's here's the
deal we're going to make and and of
course that's just not the world we're
in today you just mentioned NATO I mean
given CA Harris appearance at the Munich
security conference she seems very very
committed to this Alliance do you agree
absolutely uh I I think that she sees
that this Alliance is essential um to US
National Security and she also
recognizes that a lot of the problems
that we have are Global and that you
need strong friends and you need to work
with those strong friends so yeah look
she she certainly would be interested in
seeing these countries continue to spend
more uh Obama did Biden did Trump did I
mean this is not surprising um and I
don't think the 2% figure is written in
stone uh I think that there is upward
pressure on that 2% of GDP spend even as
the European countries are facing higher
interest rates and challenging fiscal
environments there's of course China
doing have any idea how Camila Harris
policies are and her take on tariffs
against them probably the most aligned
uh with the Americans remember she was
uh there with Biden for the Apex Summit
in San Francisco her home California um
and she was very active uh with all of
the leaders there including the Chinese
delegation um I I think that she
probably uh is most aligned with Biden
on China policy this is a place where
she wants to see more more promotion of
American strategic Industries with
allies uh is worried about intellectual
property theft is worried about the lack
of rule of law is worried about Chinese
subsidies so this has been a more
consensus oriented policy between Biden
and Trump Republicans and Democrats she
would not be interested in you know a
cross theboard tariffs that Trump is
talking about but she'd be more focused
on expanding you know advanced
technology constraints against the
Chinese in a way that Trump hasn't
really focused on that we we hardly talk
about that but that's something I'm
really interested in the more than two
months between election day and the
inauguration of the elected president is
always really a time of uncertainty I I
think especially in this climate where
it's very likely that Donald Trump might
actually not accept a loss it is
completely certain that he will not
accept the loss and if it is close we
have a very serious problem this is
going to be the worst election and
postelection environment that we have
seen in our lifetimes I think it'll be
worse than uh than than you know what we
had in '
68 uh I'm I'm deeply concerned uh we
have um Trump that would completely not
accept a loss and the stakes are very
high for him he would face jail um I
think we have a lot of Democrats that
would not accept the Trump win uh the
stakes are very high uh they believe he
is a convicted felon many times over
including for lots of crimes that he
hasn't been tried for yet and that he
shouldn't be allowed to stand for the
presidency so I think a large number of
the members of the population would not
see the elected president as their
president uh and that is a a very
serious concern I see Elon Musk who is
the wealthiest and arguably the most
powerful American uh certainly in the
private sector is uh actively
weaponizing his social media platform to
promote disinformation including around
the election he just said that Civil War
was inevitable in the United Kingdom uh
there is right now nothing being done to
even try to constrain the damage that he
has the likelihood of doing to this
electoral environment so yeah I'm very
deeply concerned about where we're
heading how would foreign power might
use this time of uncertainty well it is
a vulnerability to American Allies who
need a strong and consistent transition
and it's an opportunity for adversaries
I don't think the Chinese would do much
because uh their economy is uh poor and
they don't want
unnecessarily to antagonize and alienate
American Allies so they need stability
in the global order in a way that most
American adversaries don't but North
Korea uh Iran Russia these are countries
that benefit from chaos and they want
the Americans to fail and and and I I
think the potential that they would
actually do their damnest to take
advantage of that um both uh with their
own local conflicts and also potentially
with asymmetric attacks against the
United States and allies a much a much
much more dangerous time thank you in I
hope we can continue this conversation a
little closer to the election thank you
byebye